---
title: The Luncheon on the Grass
weight: 101
object:
  - id: 1
type: entry
---

*The Luncheon on the Grass* (*Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe*)—originally titled *Le Bain* (*The Bath*)—is a large oil on canvas painting by Édouard Manet created in 1862 and 1863. It depicts a female nude and a scantily dressed female bather on a picnic with two fully dressed men in a rural setting. Rejected by the Salon jury of 1863, Manet seized the opportunity to exhibit this and two other paintings in the 1863 Salon des Refusés[^1] where the painting sparked public notoriety and controversy.[^2] The piece is now in the Musée d’Orsay in Paris.[^3] A smaller, earlier version can be seen at the Courtauld Gallery, London.[^4]

## Description and Context

The painting features a nude woman casually lunching with two fully dressed men. Her body is starkly lit and she stares directly at the viewer. The two men, dressed as young dandies, seem to be engaged in conversation, ignoring the woman. In front of them, the woman’s clothes, a basket of fruit, and a round loaf of bread are displayed, as in a still life. In the background, a lightly clad woman bathes in a stream. Too large in comparison with the figures in the foreground, she seems to float above them. The roughly painted background lacks depth—giving the viewer the impression that the scene is not taking place outdoors, but in a studio. This impression is reinforced by the use of broad “studio” light, which casts almost no shadows. The man on the right wears a flat hat with a tassel, of a kind normally worn indoors.

Despite the mundane subject, Manet deliberately chose a large canvas size, measuring 208 x 264.5 cm (81.9 by 104.1 in), normally reserved for historical, religious, and mythological subjects.[^5] The style of the painting breaks with the academic traditions of the time. He did not try to hide the brush strokes; the painting even looks unfinished in some parts of the scene. The nude is also starkly different from the smooth, flawless figures of Cabanel or Ingres.

A nude woman casually lunching with fully dressed men was an affront to audiences’ sense of propriety, though Émile Zola, a contemporary of Manet’s, argued that this was not uncommon in paintings found in the Louvre; he also felt that such a reaction came from viewing art differently than “analytic” painters like Manet, who use a painting’s subject as a pretext to paint.

There is much that we still do not know about the painting, such as when he actually began painting it, exactly how he got the idea, and how and what sort of preparation works he did. Though Manet had claimed this piece was once valued at 25,000 Francs in 1871, it actually remained in his possession until 1878 when Jean-Baptiste Faure, opera-singer and collector, bought it for just 2,600 Francs.

## Figures in the Painting

The figures of this painting are a testament to how deeply connected Manet was to Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe. Some assume that the landscape of the painting is meant to be l’île Saint-Ouen, which was just up the Seine from his family property in Gennevilliers. Manet often used real models and people he knew as reference during his creation process.[^6] The female nude is thought to be Victorine Meurent, the woman who became his favorite and frequently portrayed model, that later was the subject of Olympia. The male figure on the right was based on a combination of his two brothers, Eugène and Gustave Manet. The other man is based on his brother-in-law and Dutch sculptor named Ferdinand Leenhoff. Nancy Locke referred to this scene as Manet’s family portrait.

## Notes

[^1]: Catalogue des ouvrages de peinture, sculpture, gravure, lithographie et architecture : refusés par le Jury de 1863 et exposés, par décision de S.M. l’Empereur au salon annexe, palais des Champs-Elysées, le 15 mai 1863, Édouard Manet, Le Bain, no. 363, Bibliothèque nationale de France.

[^2]: Boime, Albert (2007). Art in an Age of Civil Struggle. Los Angeles: The University of Chicago Press. p. 676. ISBN 978-0-226-06328-7.

[^3]: Musée d’Orsay, Le déjeuner sur l’herbe (Luncheon on the Grass).

[^4]: The Courtauld Gallery version.

[^5]: Tucker, Paul Hayes (1998). Manet’s Le Déjeuner Sur L’Herbe. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. pp. 5–14.

[^6]: Armstrong, Carol (1998). “To Paint, To Point, To Pose” Manet’s Le Déjeuner Sur L’Herbe. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. pp. 93–111.



